DBZ-2862 Documentation (#4774)
debezium/debezium: documentation/modules/ROOT/pages/integrations/tracing.adoc

toc::[]

== Overview

Observability is an important aspect of microservice-oriented applications.
One of the key ingredients for observability is https://microservices.io/patterns/observability/distributed-tracing.html[distributed tracing].

It is necessary to provide additional precautions when an application writes a record to a database that is later processed by Debezium.
The active trace is effectively demarcated by the write to the database.

> If we want {prodname} to join the larger scope application tracer, we need to pass the trace metadata to {prodname}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to include {prodname} data in your application tracer, you must pass the trace metadata to {prodname}.
```

 <modelVersion>4.0.0</modelVersion>
 <groupId>group.id</groupId>
 <artifactId>artifact-id</artifactId>
 <version>0.0.1</version>
 <properties>
  <version.opentelemetry.api>1.23.1</version.opentelemetry.api>
  <version.opentelemetry.kafka.clients.2.6>1.23.0-alpha</version.opentelemetry.kafka.clients.2.6>
 </properties>
 <dependencies>
  <dependency>
   <groupId>io.opentelemetry</groupId>
   <artifactId>opentelemetry-api</artifactId>
   <version>${version.opentelemetry.api}</version>
  </dependency>
  <dependency>
   <groupId>io.opentelemetry.instrumentation</groupId>
   <artifactId>opentelemetry-kafka-clients-2.6</artifactId>
   <version>${version.opentelemetry.kafka.clients.2.6}</version>
  </dependency>
 </dependencies>
</project>
----

3. In the directory that contains the `pom.xml` file, run the following command to download all dependencies (including transitives) to a specified directory (for example. `./lib`)

[source,bash]
----
mvn dependency:copy-dependencies -DoutputDirectory=./lib
----

==== Installing the SDK

> Install the OpenTelemetry SDK on your Kafka connect cluster using the https://opentelemetry.io/docs/instrumentation/java/automatic/[Java agent] for automatic instrumentation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Install the OpenTelemetry SDK on your Kafka connect cluster by using the https://opentelemetry.io/docs/instrumentation/java/automatic/[Java agent] for automatic instrumentation.
```

> === Use the Debezium Kafka Connect image

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Use the {prodname} Kafka Connect image
```

> The OpenTelemetry API dependencies are installed in the https://quay.io/repository/debezium/connect[Debezium Kafka Connect] container image.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The OpenTelemetry API dependencies are installed in the https://quay.io/repository/debezium/connect[{prodname} Kafka Connect] container image.
```

> The JAR files are downloaded to a separate directory, and, by default, they are not included into the class path.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The JAR files are downloaded to a separate directory.
By default, the JAR files are not added to the class path.
```

 <artifactId>artifact-id</artifactId>
 <version>0.0.1</version>
 <properties>
  <version.opentelemetry.api>1.23.1</version.opentelemetry.api>
  <version.opentelemetry.kafka.clients.2.6>1.23.0-alpha</version.opentelemetry.kafka.clients.2.6>
 </properties>
 <dependencies>
  <dependency>
   <groupId>io.opentelemetry</groupId>
   <artifactId>opentelemetry-api</artifactId>
   <version>${version.opentelemetry.api}</version>
  </dependency>
  <dependency>
   <groupId>io.opentelemetry.instrumentation</groupId>
   <artifactId>opentelemetry-kafka-clients-2.6</artifactId>
   <version>${version.opentelemetry.kafka.clients.2.6}</version>
  </dependency>
 </dependencies>
</project>
----

3. In the directory that contains the `pom.xml` file, run the following command to download all dependencies (including transitives) to a specified directory (for example. `./lib`)

[source,bash]
----
mvn dependency:copy-dependencies -DoutputDirectory=./lib
----

==== Installing the SDK

Install the OpenTelemetry SDK on your Kafka connect cluster by using the https://opentelemetry.io/docs/instrumentation/java/automatic/[Java agent] for automatic instrumentation.

=== Use the {prodname} Kafka Connect image

> 

Author: @roldanbob 

There are three different ways to install the Opentelemetry API and SDK. 

The first is completely free (manual installation) and allows the user to choose their own Kafka distribution, this is my case because I use the Confluent distribution. 

The second is a simplified way managed by Debezium with the Kafka connect image offered directly by Debezium. Personally I think this is useful for testing or prototyping only. 

The third highlights the Strimzi distribution which includes OpenTelemetry. It is intended for users who have chosen to use Strimzi on Kubernetes. personally I don't use it, but the Debezium team wanted plug and play integration with this distribution.

The OpenTelemetry API dependencies are installed in the https://quay.io/repository/debezium/connect[{prodname} Kafka Connect] container image.
The JAR files are downloaded to a separate directory.
By default, the JAR files are not added to the class path.
To add the JAR files to the class path, set the environment variable `ENABLE_OTEL` to `true`.
You must also install the https://opentelemetry.io/docs/instrumentation/java/automatic/[OpenTelemetry Java agent].

> === Use Strimzi

Reviewer: Similar question as in my preceding comment.  Let's be explicit in the heading about the purpose for using Strimzi in this context, i.e., Using Strimzi to [add the OpenTelemetry components?]

Author: see https://github.com/debezium/debezium/pull/4774#discussion_r1338854488

> You can use the https://strimzi.io/[Strimzi] Kafka image, which provides all of the necessary OpenTelemetry components.

Reviewer: If this is an alternative method for providing the required components, let's use this opening sentence to explain that, for example, something like "Instead of using the {prodname} Kafka Connect image as described in the previous section, you can use obtain all of the OpenTelemetry components by deploying the https://strimzi.io/[Strimzi]) Kafka image."

Author: see https://github.com/debezium/debezium/pull/4774#discussion_r1338854488

> If you want to review the various OpenTelemetry components, examine the compose file that is provided in the https://github.com/debezium/debezium-examples/tree/main/outbox[{prodname} Outbox example].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to view the OpenTelemetry components that are available in the Strimzi image, examine the compose file that is provided in the https://github.com/debezium/debezium-examples/tree/main/outbox[{prodname} Outbox example].
```

> === Configure OpenTelemetry

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Configuring OpenTelemetry
```

</project>
----

2. In the directory that contains the `pom.xml` file, run the following command to download all dependencies (including transitives) to a specified directory (for example, `./lib`)

[source,bash]
----
mvn dependency:copy-dependencies -DoutputDirectory=./lib
----

==== Installing the OpenTelemetry SDK
After you install the API, install the OpenTelemetry SDK.
Install the OpenTelemetry SDK on your Kafka connect cluster by using the https://opentelemetry.io/docs/instrumentation/java/automatic/[Java agent] for automatic instrumentation.

=== Use Docker [[use_docker]]
Prefer this installation method if you want to use Docker for local development or testing.

The OpenTelemetry API dependencies are installed in the https://quay.io/repository/debezium/connect[{prodname} Kafka Connect] container image.
The JAR files are downloaded to a separate directory.
By default, the JAR files are not added to the class path.
To add the JAR files to the class path, set the environment variable `ENABLE_OTEL` to `true`.
You must also install the https://opentelemetry.io/docs/instrumentation/java/automatic/[OpenTelemetry Java agent].

=== Use Strimzi on Kubernetes [[use_trimzi]]

> https://strimzi.io/[Strimzi] provides a way to run an Apache Kafka cluster on Kubernetes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
https://strimzi.io/[Strimzi] provides a way to deploy an Apache Kafka cluster on Kubernetes.
```

The active trace is effectively demarcated by the write to the database.
If you want to include {prodname} data in your application tracer, you must pass the trace metadata to {prodname}.

You can add tracing support to {prodname} through the https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/[OpenTelemetry specification].

== Installation

To enable traceability in {prodname}, you must install the required OpenTelemetry API packages on your Kafka Connect cluster, together with the OpenTelemetry SDK.

There are three main methods for installing OpenTelemetry on Kafka Connect, each having its advantages:

xref:open-telemetry-manual-installation[Manual installation]:: Offers more control and customization.
xref:open-telemetry-docker-installation[Docker installation]:: Provides easier integration.
xref:open-telemetry-strimzi-installation[Strimzi installation]:: Presents a ready-to-use solution on Kubernetes that includes all of the necessary OpenTelemetry components.
[id="open-telemetry-manual-installation"]
=== Manual installation of OpenTelemetry

A manual installation provides greater control and customization.

==== Installing the OpenTelemetry API

> Install the following packages to in the Kafka Connect classpath:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Install the following packages to the Kafka Connect classpath:
```

Removes extra word

* https://mvnrepository.com/artifact/io.opentelemetry/opentelemetry-api/[opentelemetry-api]
* https://mvnrepository.com/artifact/io.opentelemetry/opentelemetry-context/[opentelemetry-context]
* https://mvnrepository.com/artifact/io.opentelemetry/opentelemetry-semconv/[opentelemetry-semconv]
* https://mvnrepository.com/artifact/io.opentelemetry.instrumentation/opentelemetry-instrumentation-api/[opentelemetry-instrumentation-api]
* https://mvnrepository.com/artifact/io.opentelemetry.instrumentation/opentelemetry-instrumentation-api-semconv/[opentelemetry-instrumentation-api-semconv]
* https://mvnrepository.com/artifact/io.opentelemetry.instrumentation/opentelemetry-kafka-clients-2.6/[opentelemetry-kafka-clients-2.6]
* https://mvnrepository.com/artifact/io.opentelemetry.instrumentation/opentelemetry-kafka-clients-common/[opentelemetry-kafka-clients-common]

> You can download them directly from the Maven repository or use the Maven dependency plugin to ensure version compatibility among the different OpenTelemetry packages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can download the OpenTelemetry packages directly from the Maven repository, or retrieve the packages by using the Maven dependency plugin to ensure version compatibility.
```

 <modelVersion>4.0.0</modelVersion>
 <groupId>group.id</groupId>
 <artifactId>artifact-id</artifactId>
 <version>0.0.1</version>
 <properties>
  <version.opentelemetry.api>1.23.1</version.opentelemetry.api>
  <version.opentelemetry.kafka.clients.2.6>1.23.0-alpha</version.opentelemetry.kafka.clients.2.6>
 </properties>
 <dependencies>
  <dependency>
   <groupId>io.opentelemetry</groupId>
   <artifactId>opentelemetry-api</artifactId>
   <version>${version.opentelemetry.api}</version>
  </dependency>
  <dependency>
   <groupId>io.opentelemetry.instrumentation</groupId>
   <artifactId>opentelemetry-kafka-clients-2.6</artifactId>
   <version>${version.opentelemetry.kafka.clients.2.6}</version>
  </dependency>
 </dependencies>
</project>
----
+
2. In the directory that contains the `pom.xml` file, run the following command to download all dependencies (including transitives) to a specified directory (for example, `./lib`)
+
[source,bash]
----
mvn dependency:copy-dependencies -DoutputDirectory=./lib
----

> +

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```
Removes stray `+` sign.

==== Installing the OpenTelemetry SDK
After you install the API, install the OpenTelemetry SDK.

> Install the OpenTelemetry SDK on your Kafka connect cluster by using the https://opentelemetry.io/docs/instrumentation/java/automatic/[Java agent] for automatic instrumentation.
> [id="open-telemetry-docker-installation"]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Install the OpenTelemetry SDK on your Kafka connect cluster by using the https://opentelemetry.io/docs/instrumentation/java/automatic/[Java agent] for automatic instrumentation.

[id="open-telemetry-docker-installation"]
```

Please leave a blank line before the start of a new topic heading.

=== Using Docker to install OpenTelemetry 
Prefer this installation method if you want to use Docker for local development or testing.

The OpenTelemetry API dependencies are installed in the https://quay.io/repository/debezium/connect[{prodname} Kafka Connect] container image.
The JAR files are downloaded to a separate directory.
By default, the JAR files are not added to the class path.
To add the JAR files to the class path, set the environment variable `ENABLE_OTEL` to `true`.

> You must also install the https://opentelemetry.io/docs/instrumentation/java/automatic/[OpenTelemetry Java agent].
> [id="open-telemetry-strimzi-installation"]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You must also install the https://opentelemetry.io/docs/instrumentation/java/automatic/[OpenTelemetry Java agent].

[id="open-telemetry-strimzi-installation"]
```

Leave a blank line between topics.

It is necessary to provide additional precautions when an application writes a record to a database that is later processed by Debezium.
The active trace is effectively demarcated by the write to the database.
If you want to include {prodname} data in your application tracer, you must pass the trace metadata to {prodname}.

You can add tracing support to {prodname} through the https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/[OpenTelemetry specification].

== Installation

To enable traceability in {prodname}, you must install the required OpenTelemetry API packages on your Kafka Connect cluster, together with the OpenTelemetry SDK.

There are three main methods for installing OpenTelemetry on Kafka Connect, each having its advantages:

xref:open-telemetry-manual-installation[Manual installation]:: Offers more control and customization.
xref:open-telemetry-docker-installation[Docker installation]:: Provides easier integration.
xref:open-telemetry-strimzi-installation[Strimzi installation]:: Presents a ready-to-use solution on Kubernetes that includes all of the necessary OpenTelemetry components.

> [id="open-telemetry-manual-installation"]

Reviewer: ```suggestion

[id="open-telemetry-manual-installation"]
```

Missing new-line between topics

The active trace is effectively demarcated by the write to the database.
If we want Debezium to join the larger scope application tracer we need to pass the trace metadata to Debezium.

The tracing support is added to Debezium through the https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/[OpenTelemetry specification].

== Installation

To enable traceability in Debezium, you need to install some OpenTelemetry API packages as well as the OpenTelemetry SDK on your Kafka Connect cluster.

=== Manual installation

> .Installing the API

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
==== Installing the API
```

 <modelVersion>4.0.0</modelVersion>
 <groupId>group.id</groupId>
 <artifactId>artifact-id</artifactId>
 <version>0.0.1</version>
 <properties>
  <version.opentelemetry.api>1.23.1</version.opentelemetry.api>
  <version.opentelemetry.kafka.clients.2.6>1.23.0-alpha</version.opentelemetry.kafka.clients.2.6>
 </properties>
 <dependencies>
  <dependency>
   <groupId>io.opentelemetry</groupId>
   <artifactId>opentelemetry-api</artifactId>
   <version>${version.opentelemetry.api}</version>
  </dependency>
  <dependency>
   <groupId>io.opentelemetry.instrumentation</groupId>
   <artifactId>opentelemetry-kafka-clients-2.6</artifactId>
   <version>${version.opentelemetry.kafka.clients.2.6}</version>
  </dependency>
 </dependencies>
</project>
----

Then, in the directory containing this pom.xml, run the following command to download all dependencies (including transitives) to a specified directory (e.g. ./lib)

[source,bash]
----
mvn dependency:copy-dependencies -DoutputDirectory=./lib
----

> .Installing the SDK

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
==== Installing the SDK
```

Install the OpenTelemetry SDK on your Kafka connect cluster using the https://opentelemetry.io/docs/instrumentation/java/automatic/[Java agent] for automatic instrumentation.

=== Use the Debezium Kafka Connect image

> The OpenTelemetry API dependencies are already installed in https://quay.io/repository/debezium/connect[Debezium Kafka Connect] container image, you just need to install the https://opentelemetry.io/docs/instrumentation/java/automatic/[Java agent]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The OpenTelemetry API dependencies are already installed in https://quay.io/repository/debezium/connect[Debezium Kafka Connect] container image.
The jar files are downloaded in separate directory and by default they are not included into the class path.
To add them into the class path, set environment variable `ENABLE_OTEL` to `true`.
You also need to install the https://opentelemetry.io/docs/instrumentation/java/automatic/[Java agent]
```

If enabled then when the message is being written to the Kafka broker the producer will extract Debezium's processing span context from the Kafka message headers, create a new child span and record information about the write to the broker.
Then it injects the new span into the message headers so a consumer of the message can restore the trace and resume end-to-end tracing.

> The interceptor cannot propagate the traceability context if kafka instrumentation is enabled. The interceptor simply propagates the traceability context before delegating the instrumentation to the OpenTelemetry SDK.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The interceptor cannot propagate the traceability context if the Kafka instrumentation is enabled.
The interceptor simply propagates the traceability context before delegating the instrumentation to the OpenTelemetry SDK.
```

=== Kafka Producer tracing

Optionally it is possible to enable tracing at the Kafka producer level.
If you enable tracing in the Kafka producer, when messages are written to the Kafka broker, the producer extracts the {prodname} processing span context from the Kafka message headers, creates a new child span, and then records information about the write operation to the broker.
Then it injects the new span into the message headers so a consumer of the message can restore the trace and resume end-to-end tracing.

The interceptor cannot propagate the traceability context if the Kafka instrumentation is enabled.
The interceptor simply propagates the traceability context before delegating the instrumentation to the OpenTelemetry SDK.

> To enable end-to-end traceability:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
==== Enabling end-to-end traceability
```
